How would you define a good teacher?
That’s an interesting question, isn’t it?
For many of us,
perhaps we might answer by saying
what we think a good speaker is like.
We might say,
“The brother uses
many illustrations in his talk”
or “He was able to highlight a scripture
that I’ve read many times,
“and yet for the first time,
I’ve seen something interesting
in that that I’ve never seen before.”
Or perhaps we might say,
“He was able to keep my interest
right through the 60 minutes.”
Well, there are all sorts of different ways
we could say that someone is a good teacher.
Of course, the best compliment
someone could receive is if they’re told
that their teaching is similar
to that of Jesus Christ,
because we know he set
a wonderful example for all of us.
But as we’re
thinking about the qualifications
for someone to be a good teacher,
let’s turn our attention
to the words of the apostle Paul.
And if you turn with me, please,
to 1 Thessalonians 2:7, 8,
here we see, in addition to some
of the matters that we just discussed,
other aspects
or other qualities that are required
for someone
really to be an effective teacher.
So that’s 1 Thessalonians 2:7, 8:
“On the contrary,
we became gentle in your midst,
“as when a nursing mother
tenderly cares for her own children.
“So having tender affection for you,
“we were determined to impart to you,
not only the good news of God
but also our very selves.”
Do you notice
some of the qualities, or attributes,
here that the apostle Paul mentions
as being very important
with regard to our teaching?
In verse 8, it mentions “tender affection.”
So love is very much connected
with someone
having the ability to be a good teacher.
In fact, to reach the heart of the student,
we have to display love as well, don’t we?
Without reaching the heart
of the student we’re trying to teach,
it’s like enjoying a meal in a dream.
There really is no benefit at all.
So if we teach
but don’t reach the heart of the student,
then it really is
of very little value to the student.
Then looking on, notice it says that Paul
was “determined to impart”
not just the message of the good news
but his very self.
In other words,
he put his whole heart into teaching others.
But let’s look up at verse 7.
Now, I feel quite confident
in saying that probably none of us
would have listed this quality
as being essential for a good teacher.
How does he start?
“We became gentle in your midst.”
Now, honestly,
that probably isn’t the first quality
that would come to your mind
with regard to a teacher.
But what’s meant
by this expression to be “gentle”?
Well, one Bible scholar made this comment.
He said that this word
that’s translated “gentle”
“was frequently used by Greek writers
“as characterizing
a nurse with trying children
or a teacher with refractory scholars.”
Now, I had to look up the word “refractory”
and add it to my vocabulary.
It means, basically, “difficult to control,
resisting authority,
unmanageable, unresponsive.”
Well, do we see an interesting thought here?
This gentleness
has a firmness and stability about it
that isn’t rocked or shaken easily
by the negative response
of the one that’s being taught.
Isn’t that an interesting quality?
And no doubt we’ve all tried to display that,
perhaps as we’re trying to teach
someone something about the Scriptures
and come across the thought
that this person doesn’t really accept it.
We state the fact,
we show our scripture,
but they still may have a problem.
Well, how do we react?
You see, if we were to demand
that they accept what we say
because we said it
or because the Scriptures say it
without reasoning with that person,
then, really, we don’t have that gentleness
that the apostle Paul is referring to here.
So that stability under pressure
in a loving way convinces someone
of something that perhaps
they’re not so responsive to.
Doesn’t that open our minds
to another aspect
of what is involved with good teaching?
Now, by contrast, if we look back
at 1 Thessalonians chapter 2,
we’ll see that the apostle Paul
in verses 5 and 6
gives us a contrast about the type of things
that we wouldn’t want to do as a teacher.
Let’s read that in verses 5 and 6:
“In fact, you know that we never
used flattering speech
“or put on any false front
with greedy motives;
“God is witness!
“Nor have we been seeking glory from men,
“either from you or from others,
though we could be
an expensive burden as apostles of Christ.”
So, what are these negative things
that we certainly would want to avoid
if want to be an effective teacher?
Well, notice that first one,
“flattering speech.”
Now, this reminds us of another scripture.
Let’s turn across to Proverbs 28:23,
and this is a good reminder for all of us.
It says: “Whoever reproves a man
“[or corrects his thinking]
“will afterward find more favor
than someone who flatters with his tongue.”
Do we see the point that is being made there?
That flattery is not really an effective way
for us to gain someone’s confidence,
but, rather, it’s by honestly correcting
the thinking of someone else.
So with our Bible students or whatever level
of teaching that we’re doing,
we need to remember
that part of the process of teaching involves
giving counsel or direction
in correcting wrong viewpoints.
For us not to do that in a loving way
really shows that we don’t love
the person properly
because we don’t really want them
to change their wrong thinking.
So avoiding “flattering speech”
is very important.
Going back to 1 Thessalonians chapter 2,
what’s the second point that Paul mentions?
A “false front with greedy motives.”
So a false front is pretending
to be someone that you’re not.
So none of us would ever want to put across
a self-righteous viewpoint
to try to convince others
that we are holier than they are,
but as it says here,
it’s to not have that “false front.”
And then it mentions “greedy motives.”
You see, there’s a marginal reference
that takes us across to Acts 20:33.
There the apostle Paul says:
“I have desired
no man’s silver or gold or clothing.”
So certainly as a teacher of the good news,
we wouldn’t want to expect
some benefits or something
that would come back to us
by means of our teaching.
There the apostle Paul
sets a good standard for us.
And then in verse 6,
he said that he wasn’t
‘seeking the glory of men,’
or as one translation says,
“insisting on our own dignity.”
So it could be that if we’re a teacher,
we may feel that we deserve
a certain measure of respect.
Yes, our position
is a little higher than the student.
If we really feel that way deep inside,
that’s going to affect our attitude
with regard to being gentle, won’t it?
Because if someone questions what we say
or if it looks like they’re not dignifying us
in a proper manner,
then we will lose that firm gentleness
that helps correct the thinking of others.
Well, when we think about all these
various attributes and qualities
that are needed for us to be a good teacher,
perhaps we might feel
that there’s a lot we can work on, I’m sure.
I feel that way as well.
It’s a continual battle
—isn’t it?—for us to continue
to try to be effective teachers.
Here is one word of encouragement
we gain from the book of Philippians.
As a final scripture,
Philippians 2:13:
“For God is the one who for the sake
of his good pleasure energizes you,
“giving you both [notice] the desire
“[yes, so the desire
for us to impart the truth
“in a loving manner to others and then also]
and the power to act.”
So as we consider our teaching abilities,
don’t just think of techniques.
But always remember
that when we’re a good teacher,
we need to be gentle in the midst of others
and help them in a loving way
to correct wrong thoughts.